TITLE: Computing Across the Disciplines (CAD); a new Center/Department at the University of Oslo
AUTHOR: Morten Hjorth-Jensen at Department of Physics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway  and Michigan State University, USA
DATE: A proposal to the board of the Mat-Nat Fakultetet of the University of Oslo; Establish a center by fall 2018 and as a new department by fall 2021


===== Executive Summary =====

* Position UiO  as a leader in computational science by recruiting faculty whose expertise pertains to large-scale computing and mathematical foundations of data science - both generalists (algorithm/tool developers) and specialists (focused on specific disciplines).	

* Develop a comprehensive set of courses and degree programs at both undergraduate and graduate levels that will give students across the university exposure to practical computational methods, understanding how to analyse data and more generally to the idea of computers as problem-solving tools.	

* Facilitate the adoption of computational tools and techniques for both research and education across campus, through education and faculty collaboration. A center and then a department will facilitate the pursuit of these goals!	


* Educate the next generation of school teachers and university teachers,  with a strong focus on digital competences. 


This proposal seeks to transform Michigan State University into the world
leader in scientific discovery through large-scale computation. The Colleges of Natural Science
and Engineering propose: (1) a new Department of Computational Mathematics, Science and
Engineering (CMSE) that is jointly administered by the College of Natural Science and the
College of Engineering, to facilitate interdisciplinary science; (2) the injection of 25-30 new
faculty lines focusing on the science of computational modeling and data science; and, (3) the
foundation for joint cutting-edge graduate and undergraduate programs. This effort will open
doors to new scientific challenges, will enable MSU to compete for Center-level funding
opportunities in computation-related areas that are currently beyond our reach, and will facilitate
the training of scientists and engineers to be an effective 21st century workforce.
The metrics for success are as follows. Within 5 years, we will have hired the 25-30 worldleading
research intensive faculty that form the backbone of this Department, who will bring in
single-PI grants and small-scale (few-PI) collaborative grants, building the foundation for CMSE
to develop large-scale funding. Furthermore, we will have successfully implemented a graduate
program (including a graduate certificate, and CMSE and dual PhD and MS programs) and an
undergraduate minor. These programs will establish student interest and demonstrate
enrollment trends. Finally, this department will facilitate the growth of the university by
participating in cross-cutting efforts such as the upcoming quantitative biology initiative. Within
10 years, the initiative will have secured Center-level funding (such as a DOD MURI center, a
DOE SciDAC center, an NSF Science and Technology Center, or similar center initiatives
coming from NIH or other federal agencies). We will have fully developed our undergraduate
curriculum with the addition of Bachelor’s programs in computational modeling and data
science, and will have strong enrollment numbers in both our minor and B.S. programs -
targeting on the order of 400+ minors and 200+ majors. At the graduate level, we will have
implemented a professional Master’s degree (including an online Master’s), and our PhD
program will have 75-100 graduate students.
CMSE is unique among computational academic units nationally, the first to comprehensively
treat computation as the triple point of algorithm development and analysis, high performance
computing, and disciplinary knowledge with applications to scientific and engineering modeling
and data science. The CMSE paradigm shift recognizes computation as a new discipline rather
than decomposed into isolated sub-disciplines, enabling application-driven computational
modeling (“pull”), while also exposing disciplinary computationalists to advanced tools and
techniques (“push”), which will ignite new transformational connections in research and
education. This research nexus also gives rise to the educational opportunities driven by similar
synergy, leveraging common resources among disciplines, and enabling joint programs and
unique degrees across the entire computational space.


===== Why should we focus on Computational Science and Data Science? =====

Modern problems in science and engineering bridge a vast range of temporal and spatial scales
and include a wide variety of physical processes. Analysis of such problems is not possible, so
one must turn to computation. To develop computational tools for such complex systems that
give physically meaningful insight requires a deep understanding of approximation theory, high
performance computing, and domain specific knowledge of the area one is modeling. Our
national laboratories have addressed the interdisciplinary nature of computing by having experts
in numerical algorithms co-located with disciplinary experts who have a deep understanding of
computation, and who use scientific computing to address key topics in science (for example,
Los Alamos National Laboratory’s Computer, Computational, and Statistical Sciences Division3).
This collaborative arrangement between algorithmic scientists and disciplinary scientists in the
STEM fields is what facilitates the exploration of challenging multi-disciplinary and
interdisciplinary topics that could not otherwise be addressed. This key observation motivates
the model for the proposed Department - a place where we will attack the critical problems
facing us in the 21st century, including renewable energy, clean water, and the role of DNA in
predicting and maintaining human health. Furthermore, this department would strive to use
computing as a critical tool to explore fundamental scientific questions in subjects as diverse as
nuclear physics and evolutionary biology. In addition, the synergy of data-driven computational
modeling, combining aspects of traditional scientific computing with data science and data
mining, is an exciting topic that this new unit will be uniquely suited to address. This is a rapidly
emerging field that touches many of the STEM disciplines, and attracting world-leading talent in
this area is greatly facilitated by the introduction of the nurturing environment of CMSE to serve
as their tenure home4. Furthermore, the development of the Department of Computational
Mathematics, Science, and Engineering will catapult MSU into the position of being a
world leader in this critical new field, and will open doors to new scientific challenges as well
as new Center-level funding opportunities, such as the DoE SciDAC and NSF OCI SI2
programs (as well as similar programs out of NIH).
To jump-start this new department at the ‘triple point’ of mathematics, computer science and
and discipline-specific computation, we propose recruiting faculty who are experts in numerical
algorithms as well as those whose primary focus is the use of advanced computation to solve a
wide range of challenging scientific problems. In addition, we wish to recruit scientists - having
joint appointments with other units at MSU - whose expertise is computation on heterogeneous
and/or distributed computing platforms, such as hardware-accelerated computing (e.g., GPU
computing), cloud computing, and middleware for dynamic optimization across HPC
architectures. To provide a critical mass, we propose hiring 25 to 30 new faculty across the
aforementioned disciplines. Co-location and research and curriculum ties enable CMSE to
break down historical disciplinary boundaries, and become the synergistic leading-edge center
of computational activities on campus. Furthermore, co-locating these scientists will enhance
the development of new computational algorithms to address pressing scientific needs and
enable the creation and deployment of the robust numerical tools required for the pursuit of
leadership-class science in virtual laboratories.
Most importantly, the new department will enable new science through these unique interdisciplinary collaborations and will
become a focal point for computational research at MSU, bringing researchers in
computational and data sciences together with domain experts in energy, clean water,
neuroscience, digital evolution, accelerators, logistics, data analytics, and more.

* "By 2020, it is expected that one of every two jobs in the STEM fields will be in computing":"http://pathways.acm.org/executive-summary.html" (Association for Computing Machinery, 2013)
* Computation is an essential and cross-cutting element of all STEM disciplines
* Computational science has developed into a discipline of its own right
* Computations and the understanding of large data sets will play an even larger role in basically all disciplines of STEM fields, Medicine, the Social Sciences, the Humanities and  education
* Students at both undergraduate and graduate level are unprepared to use computational modeling, data science, and high performance computing – skills valued by a very broad range of employers.
* The 3rd Industrial Revolution will alter significantly the demands on the workforce. To adapt a highly-qualified workforce to coming challenges  requires strong fundamental bases in STEM fields. Computational Science can provide such bases at all stages.





=== Strengths, Possibilities and Synergies ===

* Several Centers of excellence in research where Computational Science plays a major role
* Newly established center of excellence in education research
* Newly established Master of Science programs in Computational Science and Data Science
* Several excellent groups in STEM fiels who do Computational Science
* Computational topics are included in all undergraduate STEM programs, possibility to develop a bachelor program in Computational Science
* Several educational prizes and awards related to computational science 
* With a center and later a department we have the possibility to really position UiO as the leading Norwegian and perhaps European institution within Computational Science and Data Science
* Lead in the development of computations in Life Science
* Strong links with SIMULA research lab


=== Enhance Computational Science and Data Science across the disciplines ===

Data driven discovery and data driven modeling play already a central role in research. The global objective here is to strengthen and coordinate such activities by bringing together scientists and students across the disciplines.
UiO has already strong computational research and education activities within Mathematics and the Natural Sciences.
The aim here is to extend this to include

* Computational Science and data science in Mathematics and all of the physical sciences
* Computational biology and life science (includes medicine)
* Computational economics and data science and computing in the social science
* Data science and computing in the Humanities

The new department will host and coordinate research and educational programs in Computational Science and Data Science. In particular research and education that involve  data analysis and machine Learning will play a central role here. Similarly, this new department will be responsible for developments in quantum computing and quantum information theories. 

===== Courses and degree programs =====

Creation of a robust, coherent set of undergraduate and graduate degrees, with accompanying
courses, supports two complementary goals. First, a coherent program will allow the university
to consolidate undergraduate and graduate training in computation in the STEM fields, reducing
redundancy in the courses taught and allowing the university of offer a wider range of more
specialized advanced courses. Second, we will create a robust set of degree, minor, and
certificate programs that are designed to give STEM students a strong introduction to computing
that will complement MSU’s existing disciplinary training, and which will make them better suited
to be a part of the STEM workforce in the 21st century. These programs will include: a B.S. in
Computational Modeling; a B.S. in Data Science (including specializations in bioinformatics and
mathematical foundations of data science); a M.S. and PhD in Computational and Data
Science; and an undergraduate minor and graduate certificate in Computational and Data
Science5. This range of options will allow some number of students to dive deeply into
computation through the degree programs, and will enable a much broader swath of the MSU
population to learn about some aspects of computational and data science through the minor,
graduate certificate, or by taking individual courses. One desired result of the creation of these
courses and programs is the foundation of a strong community of students from different
disciplines who use similar techniques to solve a wide range of problems, which will promote
broad, interdisciplinary thinking and will help to raise the visibility of computing in the sciences
and engineering throughout the MSU campus. We note that a final benefit of these educational
efforts is that MSU will become an ideal place to perform research in computational science
education, a topic of critical importance that has thus far received little scholarly attention.


===== Structure and Justification for Planned Organization =====

We envision that CMSE will be a truly interdisciplinary unit that strives to focus on algorithmic
science and its applications to a range of critical research topics. CMSE will consist of 25-30
faculty, comprising generalists and disciplinary scientists. The generalists develop crossdisciplinary
tools addressing large classes of problems. The disciplinary scientists pursue
model/algorithm development from a domain-specific perspective, enabling application-specific
approximations and optimization of performance on exascale problems. The nexus of these
groups is what makes CMSE unique.
The joint College of Natural Science and College of Engineering committee that developed this
proposal seeks the creation of a joint, inter-college department as the ideal solution. This
structure, where tenure lines would be housed, is necessary to facilitate the recruiting of a core
group of faculty whose focus is on algorithmic science that can be applied to new scientific
challenges and computational platforms. The reasoning behind this is straightforward - the
fundamental science we are interested in developing here at Michigan State University is clearly
growing beyond the boundaries of existing STEM disciplines, in the same way that the discipline
of computer science grew beyond the boundaries of historical roots in mathematics or electrical
engineering. It is advantageous to be at the forefront of this trend.
This new department is at the forefront of a key paradigm shift. Discipline-focused departments
tend to only place value on the new science a computer programs can explore, and to not place
value on the time or energy it takes to develop critical algorithms and tools that provide a deeper
understanding of fundamental processes in science and engineering. By placing the tenure
home of computational scientists in this new department, we accomplish two critical goals.
First, a single department focused on the science of computation will strengthen the goal of
interdisciplinary collaboration, as faculty in this new unit will have a wide range of backgrounds
in many traditional STEM disciplines. Second, the new department will break down traditional
barriers between departments in the Colleges of Natural Sciences and Engineering, as the
common theme of the new department is the science of algorithms and their application to
problems in science and engineering, providing a key place for critical interactions between
these different scientific communities.
While many faculty will have full appointments in the department, joint appointments will help to
cement interdepartmental collaboration and build up a strong interdisciplinary community. This
gives MSU the flexibility to grow into this critical area by hiring cutting-edge interdisciplinary
scientists, and will also allow existing disciplinary departments the opportunity to grow beyond
their current boundaries. In the case of joint appointments, the department with the majority
appointment will lead on issues of reappointment, promotion, and tenure. For all faculty
appointed in the new unit, either fully or partially, a key consideration in reappointment,
promotion, and tenure will include the development of algorithms and computational codes and
libraries that contribute broadly to the advancement of research.
A potentially major issue with the proposed format is that a great deal of teaching capacity will
be required to launch the new undergraduate and graduate programs. Consolidation of existing
classes on campus will free up some teaching slots; however, to ensure success we propose
teaching slots be assigned to the new unit based on percentage appointment within the new
department. For example, if the faculty has 50% appointment within this new unit and is
assigned a 1-1 teaching load, one of the courses they teach each academic year will be
assigned by this new department.
A key point in making this new unit work is the creation of a robust community of scholars. To
that end, it is key that the new faculty and graduate students in this department be co-located
within the same space. We propose the creation of a common space that can hold a substantial
number of people, including 25 to 30 faculty, up to 10 visitors, up to 6 support staff, and
approximately 100 postdocs and graduate students. This space needs state-of-the-art
computing classrooms, conference rooms configured for video conferencing, and resources for
teaching in flipped and virtual classroom settings. Currently, this is under discussion between
CNS and EGR, and several locations are under consideration.
Another key point in the success of such a department is the influx of new ideas and people. In
lieu of teaching specialists, we propose recurring funds to support 50% teaching activities of
interdisciplinary postdoctoral researchers (balance supported by fellowships and research
grants), as well as funds for a long-term visitor/recruitment program that would aim to have at
least two long term faculty-level visitors in residence at any given time in order to inject new
ideas. Combined, this will help to keep the unit current in terms of the latest computational
methods and scientific problems, and will assist in the attraction of top talent to MSU.

Long term goals and sustainability
The overall goal of this department is to bring together world-leading faculty who combine the
most important aspects of computation and disciplinary research, thus enabling cutting-edge
interdisciplinary science and the training of both undergraduate and graduate students. This will
be realized by the securing of Center-level funding (as well as many single- or few-PI grants), as
well as the creation of a coherent academic program with large undergraduate and graduate
enrollments. We anticipate that each PI will bring in between $200K-$400K per year in grants,
on average. This will fully fund between 3-6 graduate students per PI, plus travel and other
associated expenses.
In order to ensure the success of these efforts, the proposed department must be financially
sustainable. Continued funding (beyond faculty and support staff salaries) is necessary to
support fellowships for top graduate students, speaker series and honoraria, visitor support,
hardware purchases, and startup packages. There are a variety of mechanisms to provide this
funding, including:
* The development of an online Master’s degree in data science and informatics.
* The development of an online Master’s degree in applied computation.
* Teaching assistantships for high-quality graduate students who need support. These positions will be TAs for introductory undergraduate and graduate computing courses.
* The program will aggressively pursue endowments for fellowships, visitors, and faculty chairs.
Taken in combination, these sources of continued funding will be critical to the sustained
success of this new department.


=== The Center/Department ===
* Administratively located under the Mat-Nat college
* Composed of 25-30 full time equivalent positions, including some current UiO faculty and when it becomes a department a larger number of new hires.
* Most of these faculty will have joint appointments with other units and/or departments at the University of Oslo and SIMULA research laboratory. As an example, one can have a 70% appointment in Mathematics and 30% at the new department. 
* Faculty will focus on computational science, data science and large-scale and high-performance computation	
* Faculty will be incentivized to engage in cross disciplinary and cross-department/college research collaborations	
* Nurturing environment to attract these faculty and pursue large and interdisciplinary grants	
* Close ties to SIMULA research laboratory and the HPC center at USIT

=== Benefits  ===

* Recruitment of new faculty who are incentivized to collaborate across the university both in terms of research and education.
* Opportunities for existing UiO faculty to expand their computation-related capabilities, and to train students to use computational techniques.	
* Broad and deep educational opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students across the university.	

=== Research opportunities ===

* Data driven discovery and data-driven modeling where machine learning plays a central role
* Research challenges that require computation-oriented multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary approaches.	
* Research problems that require “bleeding edge” (e.g., multi-petaflop/petabyte) computational approaches to interpret experimental data and complex data.
* Computational and data science research and education scattered across many departments. New department can strengthen computational science. 	
* Develop research programs on Quantum Computing, the future of computing.  "The Wallenberg foundation in Sweden and Chalmers University of technology have funded a project on developing quantum computing technologies with SEK 1 billion":"https://www.chalmers.se/en/news/Pages/Engineering-of-a-Swedish-quantum-computer-set-to-start.aspx". The aim is to position  Sweden in  a top global top position in quantum technology. 
* Center-level funding opportunities (e.g., SFF, Marie Curie etc etc).	
* Simulations of complex quantum mechanical systems using novel algorithms, with applications spanning from quantumchromodynamics on the lattice and subatomic physics, via materials to the equation of state of stars.
* Exploring algorithms from quantum computing in order to solve complicated quantum mechanical problems
* Study complex materials or the DNA using large-scale molecular dynamics simulations
* Using machine learning to solve complicated problems, from  neuroscience (our brain), physiology to complicated materials 
* Using machine learning to develop new tools for learning
* Bioinformatics, Computational Biology  and Life science
* Computational economy and computing in the Social Sciences 
* Data-driven discovery and modeling in  the Humanities


===== Possible steering committee (2018)  =====

o Institute for theoretical Astrophysics and Rosseland Center for Solar Physics: Mats Carlsson and Viggo Hansteen
o Bioscience: Tom Andersen and Lex Nederbragt
o Chemistry and Hylleraas Center for Quantum Molecular Sciences: Michele Cascella, Thomas Bondo Pedersen, Trygve Helgaker and Simen Kvaal
o Geoscience: John Burkhart, Joe Lacasce and Thomas Vikhamar Schuler
o IFI Bioinformatics: Torbjørn Rognes
o IFI Imaging and Biomedical Computing (coupling to Simula): Andreas Austeng, Xing Cai, Joakim Sundnes and Simon Funke
o Math and Mechanics: Karsten Trulsen and Kent-Andre Mardal, Andreas Carlsson
o Math and Computational Finance, Statistics and Risk Analysis: Arne Bang Huseby and Geir Olve Storvik
o Math and Cmputational Mathematics: Geir Dahl, Ragnar Winther, Knut Mørken, Martin Reimers, Michael Floater
o Physics and Center of Computing in Science Education: Morten Hjorth-Jensen and  Anders Malthe-Sørenssen
o Medicine: need people
o UV: Anders Kluge
o Social Sciences: Kjetil Storsletten and Halvor Mehlum
o Humanities: need people


=== Timeline ===

o Establish a center called _Center for Computing across Disciplines_ by Fall 2018 and co-locate with the new Center for Computing in Science Education
o Establish a department  called _Department of Computational and Data Sciences_ by Fall 2021
o "New Master of Science Program on Computational Science starts fall 2018":"http://www.uio.no/english/studies/programmes/computational-science-master/index.html"
o "New Master of Science Program on Data Science starts fall 2018":"http://www.uio.no/english/studies/programmes/datascience-master/index.html"
o Extend these Masters progrms to become cross-college programs
o Establish  a cross-college PhD program in Computational and Data Sciences, start fall 2020. This PhD program will be a collaboration between the Natural Sciences, Humanities, Social Sciences, Medicine and Education. 
o Develop a Bachelor program in Computational Science and Data Science? Need to strike a balance between existing programs and possible new _honors program_. 
o Submit an application called _Computing Across the Disciplines_ for a Marie Curie training network by spring 2019, 15 PhD positions
o Submit an application called _Computing Across the Disciplines_ to the Norwegian Research council by Spring 2019, 10 PhD and 10 PD positions
o Prepare first draft for an SFF application by  spring 2020


===== Centers and Departments at other universities =====

In Norway it is only UiO which offers a Masters program on Computational Science and Data Science. Al other universities have only Master programs on Computer Science. The University of Bergen has a Masters program on Applied Mathematics while UMB has only a Masters on Bioinformatics and Data analysis. These are limited and more focused programs. Nationally, UiO is the only university which offers broad programs in Computational Science and Data Science. 

|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Norway | University | Comp Science and Data dept | Bachelor program | Master program | Graduate/PhD program |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|         | UiO        |  No                      |  No                | Yes           | No                   |
|         | NTNU        |  No                      |  No                | No           | No                   |
|         | UiT        |  No                      |  No                | No           | No                   |
|         | UiB        |  No                      |  No                | No           | No                   |
|         | UMB        |  No                      |  No                | Yes (Bioinf+stat datanalyse)           | No                   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Out of 95 universities polled in the USA, there are less than 15 which have a department on Scientific Computing
and more than 50 that have a center on Scientific Computing. Between 20 to 30 of these offer a bachelor, Master of Science or PhD program. On Data Science there are approximately 30 departments and 40 centers. Almost 50 of these universities offer a Masters degree in Data Science and close to 40 a PhD in Data Science. 
An excellent example of a department which includes computational science and data science is the newly established "department at Michigan State University":"https://cmse.msu.edu/".

At the time of writing, no such poll has been made for European universities. From the list over Masters programs, the countries with the largest focus on these topics are Germany, Sweden and Switzerland. 

The goal in Oslo is to establish a department which covers both Computational Science and Data Science across colleges and disciplines. The department will be responsible for these educational programs and oversee that a coherent and modern selection of courses is offered and developed. The courses should reflect the needs of society at large as well as the specific research projects.  This will give UiO a unique position in Norway. 

 

===== Educational programs at  other universities =====

The Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) "keeps track of graduate programs in computational Science":"https://www.siam.org/students/resources/cse_programs.php". The list is most likely not complete. 


===== Research programs =====

